#summary Ultra-violet lamps and applications


Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation (UVGI) is a sterilization method that uses ultraviolet (UV) light at sufficiently short wavelength to break down micro-organisms. It is used in a variety of applications, such as food, air and water purification. UV has been a known mutagen at the cellular level for more than 100 years. The 1903 Nobel Prize for Medicine was awarded to Niels Finsen for his use of UV against tuberculosis.[1]

UVGI utilises the short wavelength of UV that is harmful to forms of life at the micro-organic level. It is effective in destroying the nucleic acids in these organisms so that their DNA is disrupted by the UV radiation, which is a form of ionising radiation. This removes their reproductive capabilities and/or kills them.

The wavelength of UV that causes this effect is rare on Earth as its atmosphere blocks it.[2] Using a UVGI device in certain environments like circulating air or water systems creates a deadly effect on micro-organisms such as pathogens, viruses and molds that are in these environments. Coupled with a filtration system, UVGI can remove harmful micro-organisms from these environments.

The application of UVGI to sterilization has been an accepted practice since the mid-20th century. It has been used primarily in medical sanitation and sterile work facilities. Increasingly it was employed to sterilize drinking and wastewater, as the holding facilities were enclosed and could be circulated to ensure a higher exposure to the UV. In recent years UVGI has found renewed application in air sanitization.
.

==Water purification==

Water purification via UVGI is used in most water sterilization processes, such as purification, detoxification and disinfection. Its use in wastewater treatment is replacing chlorination due to that chemical’s toxic by-products. A disadvantage is that water treated by chlorination is resistant to reinfection, where UVGI water must be transported and delivered in such a way as to avoid contamination. Individual wastestreams to be treated by UVGI must be tested to ensure that the method will be effective due to potential interferences such as suspended solids, dyes or other substances that may block or absorb the UV radiation.

= References =

[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultraviolet_germicidal_irradiation Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation]

[http://www.heraeus-noblelight.com/en/uv-disinfection-oxidation/information-for-disinfection-and-oxidation/services-and-events/emission-spectra-of-germicidal-lamps.html Emission spectra of germicidal lamps]
 